Title: Research
Date: 2018-10-15 7:19
####Current
My current research focus is the within species evolution of highly repeated DNA sequence, both TEs and satellite DNA. Transposable elements are genetic parasites which can make copies of themselves at new locations dispersed throughout a genome. They are ubiquitious and can comprise large proportions of eukaryotic genomes, often outnumbering functional genes. Satellite DNA, on the other hand, are regions of the genome where the same sequence is repeated over and over again in tandem, for thousands or millions of basepairs. Satellites are not implicitly mobile and tend to be found in subtelomeric and pericentric sequence. 

While these two classes of sequence appear disparate at first glance, there are both technical and biological factors that unify their study. First, repetitive sequence is challenging to analyze with the most common types of sequencing data--Illumina short-reads--using standard tools. A consequence is that we understand far less about the evolution and impacts of TE and satellite variation than do for single-copy sequence. So, any tool that could circumvent the general challenges of interpreting repeat-derived sequencing reads would provide insights into both classes of sequence. From the biological angle, both classes of sequence are major components of constitutive heterochromatin, regions of the genome that are transcriptionally and recombinationally repressed. Much of this sequence is certainly nonfunctional junk DNA, but the repressed state of heterochromatin and essential structures, like the centromere, are buried deep in heterochromatin. There is clear evidence that variation in heterochromatin can underlie reproductive barriers between related species, disrupt normal chromosome segregation in mitosis and meiosis, and alter gene expression locally and possibly globally (presumably by titrating chromatin binding factors). And one surprising realization that came out of this project is that there are mechanisms by which TEs can transform into satellite arrays--transposition itself regularly generates substrate from which satellite arrays can emerge.

The first task of my dissertation research was to develop a general tool for leveraging , [ConTExt](https://doi.org/10.1101/158386), which ultimately made it possible to ask a variety of questions about satelli

The general What are the pressures driving and what are the consequences. I'm currently addressing these questions within a mostly population genomic framework, examining the patterns of variation within a species